The United Nations 

Flags of convenience
Sep 11th 2003 
From The Economist print edition

Far from being a misconceived Utopian project, the UN was meant to have real muscle. What would its founding fathers make of it now? 

THE invasion of Iraq destroyed the regime of Saddam Hussein, as it was intended to do, but did it also mark the beginning of the end for the United Nations? Is the UN of any use at all in a world in which a single country towers over all others in military, political and economic clout, and is bent on having its own way? 
For some people the UN Security Council's apparent reluctance to enforce its own resolutions against Iraq was a disgrace. For others the diplomatic arm-twisting and public posturing in the council this spring by the United States was a sordid spectacle that ended with America and Britain brushing the council aside and launching an invasion without a second resolution. However the Iraq episode is viewed, the UN's standing has taken a beating. The bombing of the organisation's Baghdad offices last month casts an ominous shadow over its attempts to play a useful role in Iraq, though, paradoxically, it may also have encouraged a tentative rapprochement between America and its Security Council critics. Does the UN have a future? 
Stephen Schlesinger's superb new book cannot answer this question directly, of course. But for those trying to formulate an answer of their own, his book's detailed account of the scheming, skulduggery and political horse-trading behind the creation of the UN is a timely reminder of what the organisation's founders expected it to become. 
The UN was above all an American creation. Following the League of Nations fiasco after the first world war, no other country had much enthusiasm for a second attempt at a world body. Both Stalin and Churchill were openly skeptical. But for America's president, Franklin Roosevelt, establishing the United Nations was a top priority. Even while America continued to fight a world war on two fronts, Roosevelt devoted large amounts of time, and political capital, to his pet project. 
After years of planning in Washington, Roosevelt, seriously ill, travelled to Yalta in early 1945 to win Stalin's agreement on post-war arrangements. The centrepiece of these would be the UN. Many of the people close to Roosevelt believed that the trip hastened his death, which came two months later, only 13 days before the UN's founding conference in San Francisco was scheduled to begin. Stepping into his shoes, an inexperienced and somewhat shaken Harry Truman promptly announced that the UN conference would go ahead, and committed himself to its success. The American delegation arrived in San Francisco armed with detailed blueprints and negotiating strategies, and then spent two intense months hammering out a final agreement with 46 other countries. In the United States, the result was hailed as a triumph of American diplomacy.
The most striking aspect of this tale is that in 1945 America's global dominance was even greater than it is today. All other great powers lay in ruins, while America itself was unscathed by bombing or invasion. America's factories were working at full tilt. Its armed forces were the most powerful in the world by far, and it was only months from unveiling a terrible new weapon, the atomic bomb, which no other country possessed. America's economic output, by some estimates, was half of the world's total. 
At the peak of America's powers, in other words, its leaders were determined to create a multilateral institution involving as many nations as possible as a primary mechanism for ensuring American, as well as global, security. In his speech before the San Francisco conference, Truman was explicit about the price of doing so. “We all have to recognise—no matter how great our strength—that we must deny ourselves the licence to do always as we please.” For America itself, Truman argued, this was a price well worth paying. The contrast with the attitude of most subsequent American governments, and especially the current one, could not be more stark. Many Bush administration officials seem to view the UN either as an irrelevance or as a dangerous constraint.
Mr Schlesinger's account, based on new information from American government archives and the diaries of key participants, also puts to rest the idea that the UN was a misconceived Utopian project, founded in a burst of post-war idealism. Roosevelt was one of the savviest and most hard-headed politicians ever to occupy the White House. He had no intention of repeating the mistakes of Woodrow Wilson, whose League of Nations was repudiated by the American Senate and then became an impotent talking shop as the world slid towards another world war. Roosevelt's new organisation was to include as many nations, large and small, as possible, but it was to be dominated by the great powers and, when they were able to agree, it was meant to have real muscle.
The conference's participants were also under no illusions about what was at stake. The second world war had not yet ended, and frictions between the United States and the Soviet Union were already growing, threatening yet another round of conflict. Participants did not dream that they were laying the foundations for world government. Their aim was a global security pact strong enough to avoid another world war.
So has the UN worked as its founders hoped? Certain features which sparked fierce debate in San Francisco and loomed large in the original design—trusteeships, membership requirements, a permanent military staff committee, a revision conference—proved irrelevant in the long term. Others, such as the growth of the UN's agencies dealing with humanitarian aid and economic development, were not anticipated. There has been no third world war, but how much credit the UN can take for this is, at best, debatable. The truth is that the organisation has had its ups and downs, which have largely coincided with support or hostility to it from the great powers. 
But through all its vicissitudes, two of the UN's core features have survived. As Mr Schlesinger points out, it has become a forum where all states, including the great powers, talk to each other on a continuous basis. And with the Bush administration now seeking yet another Security Council resolution encouraging other countries to send troops to Iraq, it seems clear that the UN still retains something which even the world's sole superpower finds it difficult to do without: the ability to create broad coalitions amid an atmosphere of trust and legitimacy. 
Act of Creation, The Founding of the United Nations: A Story of Super Powers, Secret Agents, Wartime Allies & Enemies and Their Quest for a Peaceful World. 
By Stephen Schlesinger. 
Westview Press
